# The Rut 28K

Date: September 3, 2016  
Website: [runtherut.com](http://runtherut.com/)  
Official time: [6:59:12](http://competitivetiming.com/results/165240O#M)  
Strava link: [strava.com](https://www.strava.com/activities/705598598)  

I'm still processing what I did yesterday. This skyrunning thing. It's hard.
Damn hard. To put things in perspective, I've done some pretty hard races.
Squamish 50 is a 50 miler that feels like a 100K. Volcanic 50 and Buckin' Hell
both are 50Ks that feel like 50 milers. This. The Rut 28K. Man, only 17+
miles. Easy, right? Nope. Mt Hood, Wy'east, in my backyard, stands at 11,250'.
Lone Peak, the highest point of The Rut, stands at 11,166'. I clambered up
alpine ridgeline and scree field to the top of Lone Peak, hand over foot, with
nothing more than a pair of running shoes, 3/4 tights, a couple of shirts, arm
warmers, a wind shell, a Buff, and a pair of flimsy base layer gloves.
Scrambling to the top of Lone Peak was challenging. Coming down was even more.
After watching the videos of Killian Jornet, I thought coming down was going
to be cake. Nope. I'm not that good. Not many people are. Instead, I was a
downhill weenie. This course demands your focus for the entire thing,
especially the downs. And I don't have the foot placement confidence to take
the downs aggressively. Pre-race, I was so focused on the big climb to Lone
Peak (the 2nd big climb of the race), that I didn't pay much attention to how
I was going to tackle the first climb to Headwaters or the 3rd (and last)
climb, 2 kilometers before the finish. In fact, I totally didn't know that 3rd
one was coming (it's just a 1000' pimple on the elevation profile). Mike Foote
and Mike Wolfe were added to my list of race directors who are sadistic
bastards. Seriously, who designs a 28K course that's harder than the 50K
version? You're correct, only sadistic bastards.

Shout out to [Evolution Healthcare and Fitness](http://www.evolutionhealthcareandfitness.com/).
Those altitude room and HIIT sessions prepared me a ton (thanks Brad Farra and
Eric Lubell!). The elevation at Big Sky was never an issue for me. Another
shout out to a pair of runners from Missoula who allowed me to tail them for
the last mile, pushing me to run the whole down with the foot on the gas to
the finish. I never got their names.

I think I could have shaved around 15 minutes off my time if I didn't stop to
gawk and take photos and if I trained a bit going downhill on scree fields. I
just about hit my time targets. I got to AS1 1:00 (hit target), got to
Swiftcurrent (AS2) at 3:03 (target 3:00), got to top of Lone Peak at 4:15
(target 4:00), finished in 6:58:55 (target 6:00-7:00). Pretty happy with my
race. Bonus target of never having to invoke the image of Syd telling me to
"pull it together, dude", hit.

We totally lucked out on the weather. The vertical K was on Friday, the 28K
was on Saturday, the 50K is today, Sunday. Both the VK and 50K were on
shortened course due to weather conditions. The 28K was the only race this
weekend to go up Lone Peak. I'm really feeling privileged today. Also, I'm
already thinking about another skyrunning race for 2017.


## Photos

* [Mine](https://www.facebook.com/media/set/?set=a.10154681308466454.1073741839.724341453&type=1&l=4e9e938a80)
* [VotographyImages](https://www.facebook.com/photo.php?fbid=10154658987851454&set=a.76162696453.100694.724341453&type=1&theater)
